THIS ARTICLE IS ABOUT TECTONICS.

Tectonics (meaning 'pertaining to building') is the process that controls the structure and properties of the Earth's crust and its evolution through time.

In particular, it describes the processes of mountain building, the growth and behavior of the strong, old cores of continents known as cratons,

and the ways in which the relatively rigid plates that constitute the Earth's outer shell interact with each other.

Tectonics also provides a framework for understanding the earthquake and volcanic belts that directly affect much of the global population.

Tectonic studies are important as guides for economic geologists searching for fossil fuels and ore deposits of metallic and nonmetallic resources.

An understanding of tectonic principles is essential to geomorphologists to explain erosion patterns and other Earth surface features.

MAIN TYPES OF TECTONIC REGIME:

ONE: Extensional Tectonics.

Extensional tectonics is associated with the stretching and thinning of the crust or the lithosphere.

This type of tectonics is found at divergent plate boundaries, in continental rifts,

during and after a period of continental collision caused by the lateral spreading of the thickened crust formed,

at releasing bends in strike-slip faults, in back-arc basins,

and on the continental end of passive margin sequences where a detachment layer is present.

TWO: Thrust (Contractional) Tectonics

Thrust tectonics is associated with the shortening and thickening of the crust, or the lithosphere.

This type of tectonics is found at zones of continental collision, at restraining bends in strike-slip faults,

and at the oceanward part of passive margin sequences where a detachment layer is present.

THREE: Strike-Slip Tectonics.

Strike-slip tectonics is associated with the relative lateral movement of parts of the crust or the lithosphere.

This type of tectonics is found along oceanic and continental transform faults which connect offset segments of mid-ocean ridges.

Strike-slip tectonics also occurs at lateral offsets in extensional and thrust fault systems.

In areas involved with plate collisions, strike-slip deformation occurs in the over-riding plate in zones of oblique collision

and accommodates deformation in the foreland to a collisional belt.
